[Music]
okay good morning everyone let's Dive
Right In uh just to get reoriented as to
where we are and where we are going uh
undergraduates you are going to be
tackling assignment five uh this week if
you haven't already which is uh Motors
couple notes about uh
Motors we ended last time talking about
the little Kea robot that was running
around on the top of a table that robot
has wheels your robot has quote unquote
legs motor neurons send commands to
Motors and Motors interpret the numbers
coming from the motor neurons in
different
ways in these programming assignments
the number coming from the motor neuron
to the motor the motor is interpreting
that as a desired angle
Theta that's the angle that the motor
neuron wants the joint to get to when we
jump jump back to talking about the Kea
this morning that Kea has motor neurons
inside it as well those motor neurons
are also sending commands to the motors
but those Motors are attached to
Wheels those Motors are going to
interpret the values they get from the
motor neurons as desired uh angular
velocities Theta per second yeah so
motor neurons all they do is send
numbers to Motors the neurons don't
really care what those numbers mean as
we continue on in this course and we
look at lots of different legged robots
and wheel robots and wagged robots which
are combinations of legs and wheels the
number that's being sent from the motor
neuron to the motor is being interpreted
differently just wanted to point that
out now for the undergraduates that are
tackling the motors uh
assignment okay any questions about A1
through A5 so far so good
okay graduate students you have reached
the end or at least the end of the
beginning you are going to be tackling
assignment nine and assignment 10 this
week which again if you haven't got
there
yet in assignment nine you're going to
be implementing three different
evolutionary algorithms and they're
arguably so simple they're not really
even evolutionary algorithms yet the
first of the three that you're going to
be
implementing is random search dropping
points at random places on the fitness
landscape once you've implemented that
you're going to go and implement the
hill climber the hill climber drops a
random single point somewhere in a
fitness landscape that parent produces a
child if the child lands at some place
in the fitness landscape that's higher
than the parent meaning the child has a
higher Fitness than the parent parent is
deleted the child becomes the new parent
and the hill climber as the name implies
starts to climb its local Hill as we saw
when we talked about evolutionary
algorithms a short while back the hill
climber can get stuck
at local local Maxima or local minimum
depending on whether we're trying to get
to the bottom of Hills or the top of
Hills so the third and final this is
starting to look like an evolutionary
algorithm that you're to implement is
the parallel hill climber drop a whole
bunch of parents at random places on the
fitness landscape and then execute the
hill climber algorithm in parallel at
all those points the parallel hill
climber is starting to look like an
evolutionary algorithm because at least
we're dealing with a population of
potential solutions to our problem
that's assignment
nine assignment 10 uh you're going to be
throwing away this minimal
thre link two joint robot that you've
been working with so far and instead
switch to a nine link eight joint robot
that's got a main body four upper legs
and low and four lower legs for pretty
much anything you're going to be
creating in the P bullet physics engine
whenever you have n links in this case
nine links you always have eight joints
n minus one joints right joints connect
pairs of links uh together okay as you
build the quadrip in assignment 10 I
highly recommend you draw it with pen
and paper or annotate on a tablet
however you do it I would suggest you
draw it out first get all the
coordinates the positions of all the
links and Joints straight in your head
you're going to be juggling a lot of
different absolute and relative
coordinates so if you're still shaking
on that concept go back and review when
and where to use absolute and relative
coordinates and I suggest do not add all
nine links and Joints at once it's a
little confusing add one link one joint
at a time make sure everything's working
as you expect it to add another link a
joint and on and on you go and at the
end of assignment 10 you will have a
relatively complicated robot with a
relatively complicated neural network
controller in it and a parallel hill
climber that's wrapped around the whole
thing that's going to search for neural
controllers for your quadruped to get it
to run along the virtual ground as
quickly as possible the end of the
beginning so far so good okay next week
for uh next week for The Graduate
students you're going to be going all
the way back to the beginning and doing
everything again but in a differentiable
simulator and I will say a few words
about differentiable simulation uh in
class uh Tuesday morning when we assign
the first of the 10 differentiable
assignments to the grad students but I'm
just going to speak very briefly about
differentiable simulation and we will
come back and talk about differentiable
simulation and differentiable robots at
the end of the
course okay little bit of orientation
any questions about any of that okay I
have not dropped a link to the first of
the 10 differentiable uh assignments yet
because I haven't written it yet I am
madly trying to run ahead of all of you
so it'll be ready by next Tuesday
morning okay all right uh if there's no
questions about that uh back to our
lecture material we're working our way
through not tools of the trade we're
working our way through uh this this
third segment of the course looking at
the admittedly brief history of
evolutionary robotics this particular
branch of Robotics only started in the
early 90s so we don't have to go back
back very far we were partway through
our discussion of actually the first two
experiments that were reported in the
literature back in the mid90s we'll
start we'll go back and start talking
about those in a moment we will finish
that discussion uh today and then we'll
start in on lecture eight where we're
going to take a little bit of a
digression and talk about a particular
kind of neural network that's that's the
nnn in CNN's CNS were invented in the
mid90s and they were used for some
minimal cognition experiments which
we'll probably talk about later this
week or into next week okay that's where
we are where we're going okay so back to
the mid90s and the uh early days the
very early days of evolutionary robotics
this was arguably the first reported
evolutionary robotics experiment where
as we saw last last time it involves
this little hockey puck side
Kea robot with two wheels just to remind
you it's got six proximity sensors on
the front two proximity sensors in the
back two motorized Wheels I just erased
it the motor the two motor neurons here
are sending desired angular velocities
to the wheels which can cause the wheels
to rotate backwards stay still or rotate
uh forward the six proximity sensors
they the proximity sensors will report
very low values if they see nothing in
front of them or something far off and
the each proximity sensor starts to fire
more strongly as that proximity sensor
approaches some object that that
proximity sensor is facing okay we ended
last time I ended last time by
challenging you to think up a fitness
function Fitness function we're going to
use five for our fitness function here
we're going to going to try and write
down a function here of these 10
variables some combination of these 10
variables and we want to write down a
function so that the Val whatever the
values of these 10 variables are the
function evaluates to zero or near zero
if the robot is doing the worst possible
thing and this Fitness function when fed
these 10 numbers should evaluate to a
number very close to one if this robot
is doing close to or very well at
whatever we want the robot to do which
in this case is to drive around and
around this track as quickly as
possible let's go what did you come up
with
um I'm assuming that one through six is
the first six sensors that are on the
front of the robot are on the back we
can assume that proximity sensors 1
through six are on the front and seven
and eight are on the back so you'd have
um
BL and
then have it
be have
multiplied by VR to make sure that
they're both going at like a sort of
equal distance for you to get one
and then VL should
be it should be like
having one two and three um subtracted
by four five and six to get like what
the true value of VL should be then have
the opposite for
VR or when you say one two three you're
talking about the proximity sensors now
yes okay let's hold off on the proximity
sensors for a moment this is a good
start let's incrementally build up this
Fitness function I want you to run this
in your head we don't have a Kea here so
we can't try it out so if we drop a
neural network controller into our Kea
here we drop in weights for all of these
synapses and the resulting wheels don't
rotate at all for example so VL and VR
are near zero the robot is staying still
and fi uh fi is is evaluating to a value
near zero so a pretty good start right
the wheels don't turn the robot isn't
moving it's not doing what we want and
the fitness function correctly says yes
this set of synaptic weights is not
causing the robot to do what we want
let's ass assuming VL and VR are both
spinning forward very quickly and the
robot takes off and starts driving in a
straight line it's a good start this is
going to evaluate to some value
maybe not one but at least above zero
it's doing the right thing what about
the left wheel spinning back and the
right wheel spinning forward and the
robot is turning
counterclockwise a negative value so not
quite what we wanted here but at least
we're in the right ballpark right higher
values more positive values are get G
are rewarding controllers that cause the
robot to move forward very quickly or or
both wheels turning backwards very
quickly nice idea to multiply these
together because if they're both
negative and the robot is
reversing there's nothing here that says
the robot can't drive backwards through
the maze that's okay that would also
give us a high value of five so pretty
good could you maybe divide it by V time
VR plus the summation of the proximity
sensors say that again you wanted to
divide it by something dividing it by V
VR so that way it's like always um so it
can't be above zero and then in the wait
so you want to put VL VR on the
denominator keep that as numerator but
divide it by the sum of that term plus
the summation of the proximity sensors
yeah then you're trying to um like
minimize the number of sensors that are
on at any given point so you're try not
to run into stuff okay so let's iterate
over all eight proximity sensors and
then just adding the V VR term that way
if you have none that it's not with
infinity okay all right
so J is going to iterate over 1 through
eight so this is the value of the jth
proximity sensor I was not a good choice
for proximity sensor but there you go
all right apologies for my notation here
so we're going to sum up all of these
and then you want to also add the
product again did you say that way if
like it wasn't if all those terms were
zero you're not dividing by
zero fair enough okay can you run this
Fitness function in your head we drop
some random set of synaptic weights onto
the Kea and let's imagine that the Kea
takes off in a straight line VL and VR
are both positive both wheels are
rotating forward so the robot starts to
move let's say this is forward hard to
tell from this grainy 1990s photo which
direction it's actually pointing in but
let's assume this is the front of the
robot and it starts driving forward as
it starts to drive forward what's
happening to the six proximity sensors
on the front of the robot maybe not all
eight but for the majority of the eight
proximity sensors what's
happening as it starts to move
forward the values are changing there
the values of these of the six on the
front changing changing
how we're getting closer to a wall
they're going to have higher vales
they're going to start to increase so
the value down here on the denominator
is starting to increase which which is
pulling the whole value of fi downward
which is good that's the intuition that
we
want go ahead like if you spin in a
circle in the Middle with no walls just
be one so if this spins if this spins in
a circle we've got one of the wheels
with a negative angular velocity and the
other wheel with a positive angular
velocity so they're canceling out right
well and then you put it over itself so
we've got zero on the numerator we've
got zero down here and it's spinning in
place so I don't know what the proximity
sensors are doing it's starting kind of
near this wall so maybe they're kind of
intermediate values kind of hard to
say I was saying what if it's near zero
you still have like the same number on
the top and bottom if the if the
proximity sensors are firing near zero
you're saying like if the proximity
sensors are near zero and then
blvr are
like not they're not moving the robot
around like moving enough that they're
not zero okay so you just have then it
would just be
one be like the best okay possibly maybe
instead of adding vvr in the body we
just add one because that would be the
maximum value of that that way it
wouldn't cancel out its signs
and okay maybe a little bit better if
you're not able to follow what kind of
behavior this is selecting for to run
this in your head that's okay the main
message I want I want you to take away
from our little discussion here this
morning is that it's not easy to
actually write down a fitness function
and give it to the evolutionary
algorithm this is arguably one of the
simplest evolutionary robotics
experiments we're going to see in this
course as we keep going things are going
to get more complicated we're going to
have robots with more Motors more
sensors we're going to want them to
exhibit more complex Behavior which
means there's more possibility of
perverse instantiation there's more ways
for this thing to do the wrong thing
right we started our discussion of the
Kea about thinking about this which
meant one perfectly valid solution is
this right so we got to multiply them to
guard against that particular kind of
perverse instantiation It's
Tricky okay here's what the here's what
the investigators of this experiment
came up with and we're going to walk our
way through this first thing to notice
about the fitness function is it's the
product of three terms one two three and
we're going to talk about these three
terms in turn let's start with the first
one uppercase V this first term is
actually a sum of the absolute
values of the velocities of the wheels
and remember that the wheels can take on
the the wheels can rotate at any
velocity in the range of
-.5 theta per second up to plus5 Theta
per second so by summing the absolute
values of these we gu we can guarantee
that this particular term ranges between
0 and
one as you all have already identified
if we had just I can't cover up this
term but if we had just plugged in v and
not these other
terms our robot is still vulnerable to
perverse
instantiation right this spinning in
place where one wheel is rotating at
minus5 and the other wheel is rotating
at at plus5 that would still max out
this particular term I don't know but
I'm guessing the researchers probably
did this and ran it on the robot and saw
as Evolution proceeded that the robot
evolved to spin in place faster and
faster that's my guess so they probably
went back to the maybe literally the
Whiteboard and multiplied it by one
minus the square root of Delta V so
here's what does Delta V do it takes the
difference between the magnitude of the
two
velocities we're going to see a lot of
double and triple negatives in Fitness
function so we've got to lean into this
here we go so what minimizes what what
values of VL and VR minimize Delta
v0.5 for both
um what values of VL and VR will
minimize Delta V here just Delta
V that's close together anything that's
close together right the the more
similar VL and VR are to each other the
smaller Delta V the smaller the Delta
between VL and
VR if we go back to this term forget the
square root for a moment they're taking
1 minus Delta
V what maximizes
V what maximizes one minus Delta V when
V and V when VL and VR are the same
again apologies lots of double negatives
here right so a neural a set of synaptic
weights some set of synaptic weights
dropped into the robot and the robot
starts be uh performing a set of
synaptic weights can maximize 1 minus
Delta V by getting both both Wheels to
turn uh as similarly as possible and
that same set of synaptic weights can
maximize
V if they're spinning backwards together
really fast or forward together really
fast so far so good um for just like
capital V is
zero pointing towards one talking about
like the limit or like the range of that
yeah yes I'm sorry again this is
probably not great notation this is me
just showing you what the range of this
particular term is yeah they they were
trying in this case to come up with a
fitness function that ranges between
zero and one it's maybe not strictly
necessary but just in this first
experiment they were trying to cross all
their te's and Dot all their eyes okay
all right what about why are they taking
the square root of Delta V this is kind
of a detail but may worth pointing
out giving you a very strong hint
here why didn't why didn't they just
create a second term that was one minus
Delta V why one minus the square root of
Delta
V trying to find like the diagonal
distance then you need to find the
square root of the two
variables and if
you're if you're moving on like a
two-dimensional plane then you need to
be Computing it in relation to like the
pyan distance uh not not quite so let's
have a look at the square root of Delta
V so let's put Delta V
along the horizontal axis let's imagine
that we're going to start the
evolutionary process we're going to
start dropping sets of random synaptic
weights into the robot most set of
random synaptic weights that you drop
into this robot are going to probably
cause it to fidget and move a little bit
but definitely not race around the track
so there's probably going to be small
differences in Delta V the wheels are
turning a little bit they're a little
bit different let's imagine we're
running the hill climber on the set of
synaptic weights so we have one set of
synaptic weights we drop it into the Kea
the Kea kind of Jiggles in place and
whatever else it does there's a
relatively small difference in the
angular velocity of the two
wheels the hill climber takes that
single Vector of synaptic weights makes
a copy of those synaptic weights to make
the child genotype
and when it copies the parent to create
the child it makes a slight change to
one or a couple of the synaptic weights
so now the child is all those child
synaptic weights we drop them into the
Kea and we evaluate the Kea second time
and it also kind of spasms and jiggles
around a little bit but maybe there's a
little bit uh a little bit more of a
difference between the speeds of the two
wheels so we've moved by chance from the
parent to the child to have a slightly
larger Delta V tell me about the square
root of Delta
V what happens as we start to move to
the
right and we have robots that are
exhibiting a greater difference between
the angular velocity of the left wheel
and the right
wheel
what does the square root function look
like so a child that exhibits slightly
more Delta V than the parent is going to
have a much larger value of the square
root of Delta
V and we're taking 1 minus This this
term is a punishment term one minus the
bigger this is is the smaller the closer
to zero this overall second term is so
the square root they added the square in
the square root in to exert greater
punishment on Delta V if Delta V starts
to creep up in children compared to
their parents everybody see that okay so
we're going to see a lot of Fitness
functions throughout this course and
that's why we're spending quite a bit of
time talking about this first one this
one has three terms in it these various
terms are rewarding or punishing for
certain aspects of the behavior this
term is rewarding for Speed turn the
wheels don't sit still this term is
punishing for turning right keep the
speed of the wheels as similar as
possible they added this extra square
root to extra punish for
turning it doesn't say in the paper if
you go back and read it but my guess is
when they started dropping sets of
synaptic weights onto this kepra and
watching One Behavior after another most
of those behaviors the robot was
probably doing a lot of this so they
went back I'm guessing and added square
root to root out get rid of that
behavior as quickly as possible they're
exerting more or stricter punishment for
doing more of a bad thing everybody see
that okay given that tell me about the
third term what is the third term is it
rewarding or punishing it's punishment
term for getting too close to walls it's
punishing for getting too close to walls
the the clue that it's a punishment is
it's one minus something so it's
probably trying to this term is probably
trying to minimize this something this
I it is punishing less yeah they did not
apply a square root to this okay
terrible termin uh notation here we've
got one minus I so let's go and have a
look at
I we won't actually write out the
equation for this but at every time step
that the that the Kea is running around
on the tabletop in this maze they look
at all eight of the proximity sensor
values and remember that the proximity
sensors can report a floating Point
number anywhere between zero and one so
they're looking at all of them and
they're looking for the highest number
among those eight proximity values at
that time step they hold on to that
maximum value the robot moves again a
little bit and they're recording all
these sensor values they look at the new
set of eight proximity values and if
there's a new value within that set of
eight that's even higher than the the
maximum recorded value so far they throw
away that value and hold on to that one
so among all eight proximity values over
the lifetime of this robot's Behavior
they're looking for the maximum value of
any proximity sensor why why did they do
that
why not just take the average because
the maximum value would be the one it's
closest to and so it's makes sense to
pay so you don't bump into the wall
closest to absolutely right so the robot
might actually stay still for quite a
while and then right towards the end of
the evaluation period it suddenly takes
over and hits the wall right if we took
the average of all the proximity sensors
over those let's say 10 seconds that we
evaluated the Kea the average value of
the proximity sensors would actually
maybe be pretty good right this robot is
only as good as its worst proximity
value what's the closest it ever gets to
a wall or potentially hits the wall so
generally speaking we're trying to
minimize the values of the proximity
sensors stay away from the
walls and go really fast and make sure
your wheels turn at as similar values as
possible multiply all those three
together and I'll show you the
experiments on the next slide but as you
can imagine with all of this leadup they
ran this experiment they kept dropping
sets of synaptic weights over and over
and over again into this little hockey
puck and eventually they started to get
sets of synaptic weights that yielded uh
motor motor and values which when
combined into fee started to produce
values of f fi closer and closer and
closer to
one what Behavior do you think was doing
that what was the robot actually
doing or getting better at doing as F
started to approach one over
evolutionary
time driving around pretty fast without
driving around pretty
fast in the Maze this is the mid90s
pre-youtube era so I'm afraid no Fancy
videos we'll see lots of fancy videos
later I promise here was their attempt
to show you what the best set of
synaptic weights did they ran their
evolutionary algorithm for almost three
days and at the end of those three days
they had a particular genotype that when
supplied to the robot produced this
Behavior what do looking at each one of
these little cross stitches is the
center of that short line segment is
representing where the robot is and the
angle of that little line segment is
indicating the direction that the robot
was pointing
in everybody see that and each one of
these little uh ticks is representing
changes in the position of the robot and
the position of its heading how did the
robot
do
did the robot do the best is this the
best it could have possibly
done maybe probably not you can sort of
see from some of the little wig Wiggles
and kinks in the trajectory that even
though we don't know what the optimal
solution is we can be pretty sure it's
not the best biological evolution and
evolutionary algorithms are satisficers
not optimizers we're never guaranteed to
get the best behavior we hope that for
most
applications really good or pretty good
is good
enough
questions okay all right so let's we
haven't really talked about the
evolutionary algorithm itself they uh
they didn't run a parallel hill climber
but it was something like a parallel
hill climber they had a population of
vectors they took each vector and
dropped those random synaptic weights
onto the Kea uh robot evaluated the Kea
for about 10 or 20 seconds somebody
reached in grabbed the Kea put it back
to the starting position in the Maze
somebody else on some desktop hit enter
which downloaded the next vector or set
of synaptic weights onto the Kea it ran
around for 20 seconds reset the Kea
download the next one the first
generation which contained a whole bunch
of sets of random synaptic weights took
40 minutes to
run after they had evaluated each
genotype each set of random synaptic
weights they applied fi to each of those
vectors and vectors that suffered a low
value of fi were deleted and those
vectors that enjoyed a high value of fi
produced randomly modified copies of
themselves and those new vectors were
again downloaded on the KRA and over and
over again for another 99 Generations
question yeah it's not specified here I
don't actually remember you'd have to go
back and look at the paper let let's say
a 100 I'm not quite sure right so 100
random vectors that means you got to
evaluate the physical Kea 100 times so
10 20 seconds of evaluation 100 times
plus half a minute or a minute to reset
the Kea press enter download blah blah
blah with mid 90s technology and all of
that added up to about 40 minutes of
real time in the real world no physics
engine here real time yeah okay they sat
there and did this for 66 hours not all
at once they took a break but it took
them a total of a little less than three
days to do one trial of an evolutionary
algorithm and they got this at the end
of three days of effort know
okay again I apologize for the quality
of these images what you should be able
to see and you might not be able to see
this from the back of the room is on the
horizontal axis here we have
evolutionary time here's generation zero
here and here's generation 100 over here
and on the vertical axis it says Fitness
but they're plotting five and remember
that fi in theory can range between zero
and one and if you squint very carefully
you'll see the top of the vertical axis
here
is.3 this lower curve here this is
averaging the value of fi for all the
individuals in the population at that
generation so among all the ra the
random neural network brains for the
robot in generation zero they cause the
robot to fidget and not move very much
or maybe bump into the wall and all of
them suffer to Value ofy very very close
to zero not surprising these are random
behaviors this upper curve reports the
best individual in the population at
that point in evolutionary time so among
all these sets of synaptic random
synaptic weights there was one vector
one set of random synaptic weights that
caused the robot to actually achieve a
value of five of about
.005 not great but better than the
average as evolutionary time proceded
that particular parent started to
produce children and children of those
children and so on and the
average behavior of all the sets of
synaptic weights in the population
started to rise over evolutionary time
and the best in the population also
started to get better until they reached
this particular set of synaptic weights
up here which achieved a
5.22 23 which produced this
Behavior a lot of effort for not a lot
of gain but this is the mid 90s and this
was one of the first
demonstrations of automated design of an
automated machine if you remember back
all the way to the beginning of the
course that's the long-term goal of
Robotics we want to create a machine
that is not remote controlled it's
deciding what to do based on its sensory
information and we don't want to
manually program an autonomous machine
because it's super hard so although this
is very humble and very simple and took
a long time to do this was a partly
automatic someone was still reaching in
and moving the Kea and hitting enter on
the desktop but getting there automated
design of an automated and an autonomous
machine so far so good okay all right
what do you see down here again I
apologize we've got the same horizontal
axis down here this is evolutionary time
over here the solid black line here the
solid black line is reporting the VA
value of uppercase V for the best
individual in the population uppercase V
is the total the angular velocity of the
wheels so we can see that the dotted
line Sorry the solid line started near
zero which means that even for the best
individual in the population the wheels
were turning just a tiny little bit very
very low angular velocity over
evolutionary time The evolutionary
algorithm started to discover discover
sets of synaptic weights that caused the
wheels to to turn
faster the uh dotted line represented
here this is reporting 1 minus the
square root of Delta V what's happening
to 1 minus Delta V square root of Delta
V over evolutionary time it's starting
to go down right remember this is a
punishment a punishment term we want to
punish this we're taking one minus this
which means we actually want one minus
the square root of Delta V to go up over
evolutionary
time but it's not it's bouncing around
quite a bit and then maybe it sort of
evens out at intermediate values what's
going
on the robot needs to turn to go around
the dra so there needs to be differences
if it's going to move around through
this track it by necessity has to
approach some of the walls s it can't
help it right the robot can't have its
cake and eat it too it's got to balance
uh displacement it's got to move and not
move in place and it's got to stay away
from the walls if you look at the solid
line and the dotted line This is
evolution trying to strike a balance
between what are called antagonistic
terms these two terms generally making
one term better through Evolution causes
the other one to be worse and vice versa
it's trying to strike a balance
yeah uh our ancestors as they were
evolving to walk around on our hind legs
we were trying to strike a balance
between staying upright not falling down
being able to move relatively quickly
with relatively little food in our
bellies and not lose a lot of children
to child
birth standing upright caused a lot of
evolutionary changes to the to the hip
structure of
hominids Evolution had to strike a very
very careful balance between figuring
out how to alter homonid physiology so
that we could walk upright in an energy
efficient manner not suffer unduly High
rates of child birth everything that
happens in evolution is always a
tradeoff between antagonistic pressures
yeah that is part of the reason why
biological evolution an evolu an
evolutionary algorithm is a satisficer
not an Optimizer you can't have your
cake and eat it too in the real
world okay dash line this one's a little
bit harder to uh interpret oh I'm sorry
I misspoke right we were talking about
the dotted line This is not staying away
from the walls this is
turning I I apologize I misspoke this
overall term here is punishing Delta big
Delta
V's but if you're going to move through
this maze you have to turn and when you
turn you experience an increased Delta V
one wheel has to turn faster than the
other I'm sorry I misspoke so it's still
striking a balance between the solid
line which is go fast and the dotted
line which is don't
turn then there is also the dash line
which is also trying to keep the robot
away from the walls and it can't do a
perfect job of that yeah it's a bit of a
juggling act here okay apologize I
misspoke okay this was their attempt to
try and draw to better show you how
evolution is moving through the fitness
landscape and striking a balance between
these three competing terms I'm not a
big fan of this plot so we're just going
to push on in the interest of time
okay so what they wanted to know was how
well did they actually do they put a lot
of Blood Sweat and Tears into actually
evolving this Behavior how good is
it they don't know they don't know what
the optimal is but the researchers sat
down and used a lot of brain power and
actually did try and write down weights
for all of these synapses that would
cause the robot to move through the maze
what did they do they created a brenberg
vehicle what kind of brenberg vehicle
would you want to put into this keera to
cause it to race around the maze but
stay away from the walls it would be a
coward with the wall coward with the w
walls yes so when the proximity sensors
on the front left were firing strongly
meaning the front left of the robot was
closed to a wall that should inhibit the
contralateral wheel so something is
approaching from the front left that
should cause the right wheel to slow
down relative to the left
wheel the left wheel is now spinning
faster than the right wheel the robot
should turn to its right away from that
obstacle on its front left and hopefully
if it points up and into the tunnel
uh into into the track there's less
stimulation of the six proximity sensors
on the front and it goes forward that
was the best they could come up with and
it does okay at driving around and
around the track but this particular the
brenberg vehicle has a
problem as it's racing around the track
if it ever starts to head directly into
one of the corners specifically this
corner it actually the robot slows down
and grinds to a halt you can see there's
a whole bunch of these cross- hatches
sitting on top of one another the robot
is facing into the corner and doing this
why it's getting inhibited on both sides
it's getting inhibited on both sides
right it's facing into the corner
there's slightly more proximity on the
left turn to the right now there's
slightly more proximity on the right
turn to the
left what they found is when they took
their evolved individual and pointed it
directly into a
corner it didn't have this problem it
would turn to its left and do a 180 and
start heading up the track their evolved
individual was better than a brenberg
vehicle it got stuck less often that's a
strong hint to what's going on among the
set of evolved weights
most of the time Evolution comes up with
a set of synaptic weights for our robot
and our robot does something and it's
very hard to have any insight into what
exactly those sets of synaptic weights
are in this simple example we actually
can gain a little of insight from the
nature of the behavior into what the
synaptic weights probably
are what's the hint here what can you I
haven't shown you the actual set of a
synaptic weights
know yep it doesn't do this jittering in
the
corner
know
counterwise at all times it's always
going to
PR that's true so that's a description
of behavior we're trying to go from
Behavior which in this case is just make
a 180 in when you're pointing directly
into a corner to the sets of synaptic
weights
so the weights have just evolved like
asymmetrically the weights have evolved
to be asymmetric whatever the sets of
synaptic weights are on one side of the
robot it's different from the sets of
synaptic weights on the other side of
the robot the the the the synapses here
have probably evolved a little bit of
asymmetry on
purpose if you're perfectly symmetric
like a brenberg vehicle that's not
necessarily A good thing an interesting
observation if you look around in nature
including the 2030 or so so hominids
that are in this room right now we
mostly look bilaterally symmetric the
left of you looks like the right side of
you for most purposes being bilaterally
symmetric is a good thing but there are
certain subtle situations where a little
bit of asymmetry is actually a good
thing and there are cases of that in
nature and here we see artificial
evolution rediscovering that fact that a
little bit of asymmetry is often is
sometimes a good thing do they try the
robot in like a
different great question if they did
they didn't report it in this paper it
probably did horribly and they were
probably exhausted after all of this and
figured they'd done their due diligence
write it up and submit it for
publication that I would agree who knows
they don't say okay any other questions
about this first evolutionary robotics
experiment before we move
on okay this experiment was conducted in
Switzerland in about
9394 at the same time on the other side
of the English Channel at the University
of Sussex in the UK this particular
experiment was being conducted so in the
history of the field it's usually these
two experiments which are pointed to as
the first ones which one came first as a
matter of of argument okay this robot it
looks very very different from the one
we just saw here we go this is has
become known since as the Gantry robot
for a very good reason it's a Gantry
these Sussex researchers took a table
and a saw and sawed out the actual table
to just leave uh the frame of the table
and then they set this large wheel
trolley on top of the of the table this
is known as the X trolley the wheel this
x trolley can move back and forth left
and right along the top of the
table on top of this x trolley they
placed a smaller y trolley that can that
with a wheel trolley that can move up
and down along the spine of the X
trolley so far so
good okay they then dangled again they
had a tether to a desktop no Wi-Fi in
the mid90s everything's going to run on
the desktop computer here they have a
tether and cable and that cable descends
and drops through the center of the
little y trolley and drops down below
the table and at the end of this tether
is a camera pointing straight down
towards the
ground this is a very crazily designed
robot so far so good
okay the camera is in here you can't
actually see the camera it's pointing
downwards it's not actually pointing at
the ground it's pointing at a little
circular Dental mirror this little ra
circular mirror this circular mirror is
attached to a little motor underneath
and this motor is spinning this Dental
mirror this design design is getting
Crazier by the minute so far so
good tell me about this little vertical
setup here it might sound a little bit
familiar we have something that's
pointing in a vertical Direction and
there's something that's spinning
allowing the robot to look actually
horizontally around itself under the
table aisc it's an inverted Periscope
right like on a submarine you send
something up and you look around this is
just the opposite something is pointing
downward under the table and looking
around at things placed on the floor
under the
table what was the point of this crazy
machine I did my Master's Degree at the
University of Sussex in 99 and at this
point the gantter robot had been
mothball that was 6 years old at this
point but it was still there and of
course all the students wanted to go
over and look at this machine which
should have ended up in a museum I don't
know what actually happened to the
Gantry robot why would serious Engineers
ever make such a crazy
machine as you can guess they're going
to start to drop sets of synaptic
weights onto this robot to control the
Gantry robot and the spinning motor to
cause it to do some desired behavior in
and among objects placed underneath the
table why did they set things up like
this any idea
Emily what's that drone of a drone okay
maybe this is long before drones ever
existed yep satellite like
GPS okay maybe they're trying to
prototype some bigger more serious
technology turns out that wasn't the
reason there was a actual Here and Now
practical reason for for setting things
up in this way seems
odd what's
that oh yeah yeah maybe this would again
approximate some sort of Rover moving
around is it so that you can just move
in X and Y without getting closer
getting closer to the answer something
in a factory a fixed area yeah okay so
don't think about actual applications
maybe this particular way of setting
things up no they they're about to run
an evolution algorithm on this
robot and they're try they set
everything up in a particular way to
make this easier in the back corner
find could be so we're proposing like
what kind of behavior they actually
evolved doesn't matter what the behavior
is why set things up in this way well
it's like it's as you said like Sol is
highly specific have like three
variables to actually play with uh three
variables right so there's the motor
controlling the the X trolley a motor
controlling the Y trolley and a motor
controlling the spinning Dental mirror
okay I'm really fishing here let's see
if I can get
it now we're getting a lot closer right
if you think about it with these two
trolleys moving around the cable
actually never rotates getting very
close to the right answer now they've
made their lives simpler they don't have
to go in and disentangle this cable the
Italian res Searchers back in
Switzerland they had to go in and
untangle the wire over and over and over
again they didn't have to reset
everything up there it
is drop a set of synaptic weights onto
the Gantry robot the X trolley the Y
trolley starts moving the dental mirror
starts moving they collect all the data
from this moving robot on the desktop
they have some Fitness function that
computes the value of that set of
synaptic weights they're done after
about 20 or 30 seconds of evaluating
that neural network controller they hit
one button on the desktop and everything
moves back and resets itself without
them having to touch the Gantry
robot the Sussex researchers were smart
they started to realize what they were
getting themselves into if they were
going to try and evolve behaviors for
this robot that's why they designed it
in this crazy
way okay
all right so we just uh we just talked
about the three motors something that
moves the X trolley back and forth a
second motor that drives the Y trolley
back and forth on the X uh uh the X
trolley the Y trolley on top of the X
trolley and a third motor in here that
spins the dental
mirror let's talk about the sensors now
we've got three motors in this
particular Gantry robot there are seven
sensors let's go through them you'll
notice there's one additional item
they've placed on the bottom of their
inverted pendulum which is just a little
plastic disc nothing fancy going on here
but as this inverted pendulum is moving
under inverted Periscope is moving
underneath the desk if that per inverted
Periscope ever bumps anything this
plastic disc will hit that object under
the table first and it will deflect
it'll rotate this whole thing and
there's a little sensor sitting in here
which is detecting the angle of
deflection of this plastic
disc I won't go into the details but
they basically take the result from that
sensor and they uh and they turn it into
four different binary sensor values was
the robot bumped from the front right
yes or no was the robot bumped from the
back right yes or no same so we got four
different sensors each of those sensors
at any given point in time when the
Gantry robot is moving those four sens
each of those four sensors is either
going to report zero or one so far so
good okay all right this is the tricky
part the fifth and sixth and seventh
sensor pay attention here we go
I mentioned that there are three motors
in the Gantry
robot in the in the evolutionary process
we're about to see the neural network
controller of the Gantry robot only is
able to control the first two Motors the
neural network controller is only going
to drive the two trolleys they're going
to set the third motor to a constant
angular velocity that motor is just
going to keep spinning
constantly doesn't matter what the
trolleys are doing which causes the
dental mirror to rotate around and
around at a constant velocity and the
camera is continuously recording
frames video frames of what is hitting
the dental mirror so far so good so
imagine you're in a submarine looking
through a periscope upwards and you keep
doing this imagine it's probably easier
to just take everything that is seen in
that 360 View and squash it into one
frame that's showing you a complete 360
Dee view so far so good that's what the
Gantry robot did every tenth of a second
the camera spun the dental mirror
through One 360 degree rotation every
tenth of a second and all and the
desktop computer actually stitched this
all together into one 360 degree
view so far so good okay this is mid90s
technology so they're getting a a huge
amount of pixel data every tenth of a
second it's too much information to feed
into a neural network controller at that
time so they added one additional detail
which is inside the set of vectors
inside the vector that encoded the
synaptic weight there were an additional
nine numbers that were tacked on to
every set of synaptic weights so we're
talking about the genotype now a
genotype for the Gantry robot
encoded uh weights of all the synapses
that connected the seven sensors to the
two Motors the motors that control the
two Gantry robots and nine additional
numbers what are those nine additional
numbers in code I want you to take those
nine numbers and break them into three
sets of three in your
mind each triplet of numbers specifies a
2d coordinate in this video frame so a
particular point in the frame and the
third number in the triplet indicates a
radius
so if we take those nine numbers and
turn them into a phenotype the phenotype
is three differently sized circles that
are dropped at three different positions
into the video
frame so far so good there's a lot of
seemingly odd details in the in this
experiment but trust me there's a
there's a reason for
this at the moment when you're looking
at me or you're looking at the slide or
you're looking down at the desk it feels
like you're getting a more or less maybe
not
360 but you're getting a pretty good
panoramic view of everything at the
front of this room right that's how it
feels at the
moment thinking about thinking is
misleading that is absolutely not what
you're actually getting at the back of
your eye you have a very small region on
which light is being focused so it might
not feel like it but most of the time
actually all of the time what you're
getting is this you're getting a very
focused small bit of your visual field
that's known as your fobia the focused
part of your eye that's what they're
simulated here simulating here but in
this case the researchers are allowing
Evolution to drop three fobia these
three circles all of the pixels in the
video frame that are outside side of
these three fobia that data is thrown
away so far so
good okay so we have these three circles
and for each circle at every every tenth
of a second for each new video frame the
there's some code that takes the value
of all of the pixels inside one of these
fobia and takes the average brightness
of the pixels in inside that phobia so
they're also throwing away color they're
throwing away detail shape lines
cross-hatching all the other detail that
might have been captured by these pixels
and
reducing uh everything that's inside
that single phobia to a single number
what's the average brightness of the
pixels inside that fobia so far so good
okay so for a given Snapshot from the
camera they're going to get back three
numbers from these three fobia the
average brightness inside of these three
fobia those are sensors six sorry five
six and
seven so it can like basically look
around with in its visual field it can
decide like what to look at H it can
decide actually it's the genotype that
decides the genotype contains a bunch of
synaptic weights and numbers so the
genotype is encoding where the phobia
are where your eyes actually are it's
not where your eyes are going to focus
in us we have one phobia which is at the
back of your eye who decided to place
our phobia at that particular place in
our eyes an evolutionary process for our
ancestors and luckily still for us it
makes sense to focus on the back of your
eye which means focusing on on exactly
what your eye is pointed at not
something up here right same idea here
they're going to evolve uh fosi focusing
points inside their visual field and the
Gantry robot is going to Evol is going
to uh ignore everything
else so this is a little confusing let's
try and put some of this stuff
together we've got these two trolleys
moving back and forth along the table
which means the inverted Periscope under
the table is moving about in
two-dimensional space but the Periscope
is not rotating so luckily the cable
doesn't get snarled the camera is
spinning the dental mirror it's taking a
picture throwing all of that spinning
and all that material away and at every
point in time it's just getting three
numbers what's the average brightness of
the pixels there there and and there at
every tenth of a
second a different genotype a different
brain for the robot with these sets of
synaptic whites might encode a different
placement and size of the three fobia so
Evolution can evolve the ability to look
at or focus on different parts of the
robot's visual
field again some of these details still
seem strange why they did
this we'll see why in a moment so far so
good Okay so we've got seven sensors
we've got two Motors how many total
synaptic weights does the genotype need
to
encode as always they're going to wire
up every sensor neuron to every motor
neuron how many
synapses 14 right so each of the seven
sensors has two outgoing synapses seven
time 2 is 14 in every genotype we've got
14 synaptic weights plus an additional
nine numbers that incode the fobia 14 +
9 is 23 in the genotype it's a vector of
numbers
okay all right here we go here's the
evolutionary algorithm they started uh
with a particular way of evolving these
set of 23 numbers they evolved the Gant
robot to do something simple and then
once it evolved the ability to do
something simple they changed the
fitness function to select for or evolve
for a more complicated more difficult
Behavior once the Gantry robot evolved
to do this more complicated task they
replaced that Fitness function with a
yet more difficult Fitness function
sound familiar
we've seen this before where did we see
this before scaffolding this is
scaffolding I showed you an example of
this right back at the beginning of the
course with the robot that was lifting
that Blue Block onto its back when it
evolved the ability to do that we made a
change which made things more difficult
in that experiment we changed the
environment in this experiment we're
going to change the fitness function
okay this first Fitness function what
they're going to do is they're going to
take those 23 weights download it onto
the Gantry robot and they're going to
want to see that the Gantry robot drives
towards the back wall from some random
initial position under the
table they're going to then send a
command that sends the gantu robot to
some other random position under the
table and they're going to evaluate that
same set of 23 numbers that same
genotype again so they're going to
assess the fitness of one genotype
multiple times and they're going to take
the average of the behavior of the
Gantry robot for that set of 14 synaptic
weights plus the nine numbers that
encode the three fobia and in this first
case they want to see that for random
positions the robot always drives
towards the back
wall they made this task a little bit
easier for the Gantry robot they placed
a big black
rectangle uh underneath the back to uh
um struts of the table so it's got
something to sort of look at and evolve
the ability to go towards go towards the
big black rectangle underneath the
table so far so good
okay it didn't take them long to evolve
a set of 23 numbers that when downloaded
onto the Gantry robot no matter where
the Gantry robot started it would always
drive the inverted Periscope to the back
wall not that difficult then once they
got that they continued evolving this
population of length 23 vectors but now
they changed the fitness function so
that every time they set the initial
position of the Gantry robot they placed
a black rectangle either a black
rectangle either at the back left of the
table or at the back right of the table
and the robot had to drive to the
rectangle not that difficult a little
bit more
difficult finally once the Gantry robot
evolved a set of 23 numbers that when th
when those 23 numbers were downloaded
onto the Gantry robot it would always
drive towards the back rectangle no
matter where it was placed uh underneath
the back part of the
table so far so good okay once they got
that they replaced that Fitness function
with another Fitness
function that uh the fitness function
that's selected for the following
Behavior the Gantry robot was set again
to some random position underneath the
table and they would place a a black
Square back left and a triangle back
right and the robot should drive away
from the rectangle and go to the
triangle then they'd reset the Gantry
robot to some random position and they'd
swap the positions of the rectangle and
the triangle now the triangle was placed
back left and the rectangle was placed
back right the robot should do the same
thing avoid the rectangle and drive to
the
triangle doesn't sound that difficult I
would normally go through the fitness
functions I'm not going to do that in
the interest of time because I want to
finish this lecture today have a have a
go at trying to come up with these three
Fitness functions this is optional
homework I want to end with this slide
today like we saw with the little Kea
robot racing around inside the maze
here's a
visualization of the best set of 23
numbers that the evolutionary algorithm
produced again after two or three days
of running on the Gantry robot so during
those three days The evolutionary
algorithm tried out hundreds or
thousands of genotypes on the Gantry
robot and it did the Gantry robot did
whatever those 23 numbers caused it to
do over and over and over again until
eventually they got a set of 23 numbers
or a genotype that caused the robot to
produce this phenotype this Behavior
okay how do we parse this figure we're
looking down from above through the
table in this case the rectangle has
been placed in the back left part of the
table the triangle has been placed at
the back
right they commanded the Gantry robot to
move to this random position in the
horizontal plane of the table the Gantry
robot starts to move like this describes
a 180 hits the front edge of the table
and starts to then move in this
direction and eventually ends up up
right in front of the triangle so far so
good same set of 23 numbers they kept
those 23 numbers they commanded the
Gantry robot to now move to this set of
initial to this initial position and in
this case the Gantry robot drove more or
less directly to the triangle they reset
the Gantry robot to a third random
initial position it did this they
commanded the Gantry robot to move to a
fourth and final initial position and
the Gantry robot moved with this crazy
cork screw behavior until eventually
straightening out and heading directly
to the
triangle it's not shown here but if they
swapped the shapes underneath the table
and evaluated the Gantry robot again
with that set of 23 numbers it would do
something like this but it would drive
directly to the back left part of the
table and stop directly in front of the
triangle so far so good okay we got
three minutes left perfect here we go so
it looks like when we're looking at the
behavior of this Gantry robot then it
can now distinguish between triangles
and rectangles again it's not going to
win any Nobel Prize for this not the
most difficult task to perform but
presumably this robot can distinguish
between triangles and rectangles yeah
how how does it distinguish between
triangles and rectangles deep breath
let's go and plunge into the brain of
this gantter robot and see if we can
figure out how it's doing
it it turns out that the genotype that
produces this Behavior actually doesn't
use the third phobia it actually makes
the radius of that phobia Zero The
evolutionary algorithm is kind of
showing off it says I don't even need
three phobia I just need this one and
this
one it also says I don't need the bump
sensors because there's nothing for me
to bump into there's nothing underneath
the table so what happens is although
there are seven po there are seven
sensor neurons only two of the seven
sensor neurons have synapses that
connect from those sensor neurons
eventually on
to uh eventually on to the two Motors
there's actually three outputs here
we'll just ignore this detail for now so
the EV the this particular genome is O
only using two of the seven sensors to
drive the behavior of the Gantry robot
so far so
good
okay where is the recognized triangle
neural component in here where is the
recognize rectangle neural component
oent in
here I see some of you shaking your
heads good I I know I repeat myself
thinking about thinking is misleading
this robot can clearly distinguish
between triangles and rectangles it has
no recognized triangle component and
recognize rectangle
component as uh you you might see that
there are synapses that are pointing
from the left to the right that are
sending sensory information down to the
motors but there are also some self and
recurrent connections what do recurrent
connections do in a neural
network build memory they provide memory
this Gantry robot can remember things
okay let's have a look at these two
phobia as the robot is moving around and
describing a curved trajectory these two
phobia come and they hit the left side
side of the black rectangle as they hit
it the top left fobia goes dark and then
as the robot is driving in this curved
trajectory a short time later this
phobia goes
dark everybody see that so if I'm
looking just through these two fobia and
I there's a black rectangle on the wall
back there this one goes dark and now
this one goes dark or better yet this
one goes dark then this one goes dark
that's what the Gantry robot is
seeing as it continues moving these
fobia sweep over this triangle as well
this one this phobia goes
dark then this phobia goes dark how does
the robot distinguish between triangles
and rectangles there's a difference in
like how
long there's a difference in the timing
between fobia one going dark and phobia
2 going dark we're going to end today
with arguably my favorite slide in the
entire course this is embodied cognition
this thing can distinguish between
objects and its environment and the way
in which it distinguishes is a function
of how it moves what it sees what it
thinks what it remembers it's combining
space time movement sensation action in
a particular way that allows it to
recognize distinguish between objects
with a tiny tiny tiny brain there are 10
12 synapses here easy peasy a computer
Graphics algorithm or a deep neural
network can also distinguish between
triangles and rectangles with way more
synapses and more mental effort embodied
cognition wins you have a quiz due
tonight undergraduates you're working On
Assignment five grads you're working on
9 and 10 see you Thursday
morning